All right, so just like I promised
that we would talk about,
there's also CSS variables.
Now these aren't directly
related to animations but
we're going to be using them
throughout all of our examples.
CSS variables are also known
as CSS custom properties,
and that's because they
behave like properties.
They could be inherited,
they're sort of like variables, and
conceptually, you could think
of them as variables, but
the important thing to remember is that
they are inherited and they also cascade.
So you could overwrite them depending
on specificity and things like that.
So the way that we write CSS properties or
CSS custom properties or
CSS variables is that you
first add a double dash.
And so this double dash, let me choose
a different color, yeah, that's fine.
So this double dash is what signifies
to CSS that this property is custom,
it's not the built in property,
it's one of my own properties.
And these are case sensitive by the way,
and then you just give it a name.
Now, I picks duration here, but
you could call it anything you want,
you could call it dur or
my duration or animation time,
just whatever you want to call it,
it's completely up to you.
And then just by convention,
I put it in the root,
you could also put it on
the HTML elements or the body.
Typically the roots in HTML documents
is going to be the HTML element itself,
and so you then specify some property for
that custom CSS variable.
Now, actually using the CSS variable
you do by, actually I don't know why
calc is here it doesn't need to be but
we'll talk about that in a minute.
But you could use the CSS
variable by passing in var V-A-R,
opening your parentheses and
passing the variable in.
And then as an optional second argument,
you could specify what the value
the evaluated value of this
property should be if we have no value for
this CSS variable.
So just to show you an example, and
we'll go back to our scratchpad over here.
I am going to edit the styles a bit.
So again, by convention,
we're gonna be doing this in roots.
And just for starters,
we're going to be doing colors, so
let's call this primary color and
we're gonna do red.
Okay, so the background color of
the body right now is some hard
coded color over here, but instead,
we're gonna put var or var.
I don't know why people call it var,
it's not variable it's variable, but
anyway, and
then we are gonna type in primary color.
Okay, so now you're going to see
that this is now a disgusting red,
so let's add a foreground color and
this is going to be whites,
and so I could just say color,
var foreground color.
Okay, cool, that's a little bit better,
of course this circle is very,
very hard to see, but yeah that just gives
you an idea of how to use CSS variables.
Now let's say that,
let's make this variable,
let's make this navy or
I could even pick a custom variable here.
Let's say that we didn't
have a foreground color.
So the problem is, this is going to
fall back to the browser defaults or
the normal uninherited
value of the property.
So the color is going to end
up as black in this case.
You could also specify a default
just like we talked about, and so
let's say that I put white in here.
Now because FG color doesn't
really evaluate to anything,
it's going to go for the default
that we specified, which is white.
And you could also inspect these by,
let's hover here, see the body.
We can see in the dev tools that if we
hover over for example var primary color,
you really can't see that but there is
a tooltip under that primary color that
tells you exactly what
that color value is.
So in Chrome Dev Tools,
you could actually click into that and
see this variable and then change it.
So we could change it to green, or
this disgusting orange color, let's go
like red or something like that, and you
could see a change throughout the site.
So, CSS custom properties are really,
really useful, and
they're not only useful as
a way of sharing styles, but
they're useful for actually being
manipulated with JavaScript as well.
So, besides just the CSS thing,
we also have
a JavaScript API for
changing these variables.
And so on any elements, we could call
the element.style.setProperty and
we pass it that color, you can do this
with any property by the way, but
it's honestly really useful for
CSS custom properties.
And then you could set
the value of that property.
So just an example of this,
let us reload so it's going to be blue,
and so let's do this just
as a JavaScript exercise.
Again, you can play around
with this as you want, but
when I click the body, I want to
change this from blue to say green.
So we're going to go in index.HTML,
I'm gonna open up
the script tag over here, and
then we're going to get the,
yeah, documents.body.event listener,
click.
And so when we click, I'm going to say
document.body.style.setProperty.
And we're going to set the, what did
we call it, we called it primary color,
so should be background color but
primary color to red.
And so now, just trying that out,
when we click the body, it changes to red.
So we're going to be getting more
into this when we talk about reactive
animations but it's really, really useful.
So I recommend learning about CSS custom
properties also known as CSS variables and
there is another Frontend Masters
workshop by Lea Verou that does
teach this more in depth.
So I really recommend that
you check that one out.
Okay, I'm going to use this,
just because we're going to be
using CSS variables not only for
styles but visual styles but
also for animations as well.
So I just want to get you in
the habit of doing that, and
this little animation we created,
I want to actually substitute this for
a duration variable which I'm gonna
set at the top, so duration 1 second.
And so this, of course, would be the same,
and let's change the easing a bit,
easing: cubic-bezier(.5, 0, .5, 1).
Again, this is one of my
favorite defaults, so
if you have trouble thinking
of which easing should I use,
start with this one and
then adjust these two numbers.
So now we actually need to use that,
again, we're gonna be getting into this
in future lessons, but I'm just gonna put
it here for now, and now, nothing works.
So, let's take a look at what's going on,
easing cubic-bezier, okay,
we have two conflicting properties there,
that's why that's happening.
And there we go, so
now we have a smoothly animating ball, so
let's get, any questions about
CSS variables before I move on?
>> So this change is reflected on every
element that is using this variable?
>> All right, so
the way that it works, and yeah,
that's an extremely good question.
So the way that it works, and I'm just
going to do this as an example here.
Let's say that we put this
ball in some container, right?
And actually, I'm going to be changing
this so that the body is not the primary
color but instead we're going to
be giving that to the ball itself.
So right now it has this
cool little radial gradient,
we're going to override that by
just giving it that primary color.
Okay, so let's change this color here too.
All right, so you can see right
now the ball is navy, and so
if I actually wanted to change,
let's make it a bit of a brighter color,
just so
that you could see it a little better.
We're gonna make it bright blue, and so
we're also going to make the heading
bright blue just to illustrate this.
So if I said color there,
what do I call it?
Primary color then you're
going to see that both
the heading and
the ball are the same color.
However, if I go and I add a style for the
container, which I'm gonna add up here,
and I set that's primary
color to something different.
Like let's call it red, then what's going
to happen is that only the container and
all the elements under that container, so
descendants of that container
are going to have that CSS variable.
So if we go back here,
now you could see that the heading
is blue but the ball is red.
And so we could override this
even further by just saying,
I'm going to define the primary color here
to be something completely different.
So primary color, let's do green, although
I don't really like the default green,
so let's do something nice and
bright here, and there we go.
So not only are we overwriting
the root style but
we're overriding the container style and
defining it within the element itself.
So this goes to show you that even though
you could conceptually think of CSS
variables as variables, they behave more
like properties in that they inherit.
Now, this is more of an advanced topic but
there is a way for
you to say that a CSS variable
should not inherit, but
I don't know if there's full
browser support for that.
So just know that CSS variables
inherit and they cascade, so
if you override a variable
in some parent elements,
then those changes are going to be
reflected for all descendants of that.
>> Can you override CSS
variables in a pseudo element?
>> Ooh good question, yes you definitely
can, and let's see an example of that.
So, let's say that I added before, and
I'm just gonna make it big,
with 100%, 0, top 0.
And so now I want the background color to
be the primary color, and so this before
is going to show up as a square because
we're not adding a border radius to it.
So just like you could see here,
we have a square moving across the screen.
But I could actually say,
hey, I want this primary
color to actually be orange,
let's do that one.
And so now we're overriding
it in the pseudo element.
So this follows the cascade,
follows inheritance, and
should work just as you expect,
as long as you keep that in mind,
that CSS variables do inherit.